---
layout: page
title: UKRI FLF Project "Logic in Semantic Universals"
permalink: /flf/
---

<!-- <span style="color:red">I am recruiting a postdoc to join the project. See [here](https://elxw.fa.em3.oraclecloud.com/hcmUI/CandidateExperience/en/sites/CX_1001/job/3897) for details! (28 months; Application deadline: 10 May 5pm UK time; Previously, I have mistakenly stated here that the deadline was 11 May. Please email me if you missed the deadline because of this).<span style="color:red"> -->

### Overview

**Logic in Semantic Universals (2022-2025)** is a 4-year project funded by the [UKRI
Future Leaders
Fellowship](https://www.ukri.org/our-work/developing-people-and-skills/future-leaders-fellowships/).
The goal of the project is to uncover what underlies cross-linguistic
generalisations in the semantics of logical vocabularies by bringing together
theoretical and methodological insights from formal semantics and evolutionary
linguistics.

The project team will consist of Wataru Uegaki (PI), two postdoctoral
researchers (hired at different stages of the project), and two research
assistants. The project will also involve collaboration with a number of
researchers, including: Jennifer Culbertson, Antonella Sorace (Edinburgh),
Jakub Szymanik, Floris Roelofsen (Amsterdam) and Malte Zimmermann (Potsdam).

### Project description

Despite the immense diversity of human languages, linguists have discovered
robust common properties shared across them. Since such cross-linguistic
universals are likely to provide us with a window into the core cognitive
basis of the linguistic ability we possess as a species, understanding their
nature is a fundamental goal in the scientific study of human language.
Research on cross-linguistic universals has been especially fruitful in
lexical semantics, i.e. the study of word meanings.

However, despite the rich empirical landscape, a fundamental question still
remains open: what, if any, core properties of human language the semantic
universals are rooted in. An influential hypothesis states that semantic
universals are explained by a functional principle favouring a linguistic
system that supports efficient communication (Kemp et al., 2018). Importantly,
this principle is highly general, and suggests that seemingly disparate
semantic phenomena may in fact reflect a unified functional pressure. However,
researchers disagree on whether such a general functional perspective alone
explains the wide range of semantic universals observed in the literature. A
distinct view is typically favoured in theoretical linguistics, according to
which specific grammatical knowledge encoded in our language faculty—which
cannot be reduced to functional pressures— plays an important role in the
explanation of semantic universals (e.g., Keenan & Stavi, 1986; Chierchia 2013).

There is a gap in the current research that hinders us from resolving this
tension. While the cognitive basis for the universal patterns in the meanings
of content words (such as colour and kinship terms) has been thoroughly
investigated, there has been scant research into the cognitive basis of the
universals in the meanings of logical words. The situation is pressing because
logical words provide the scaffolding for productivity, the central design
feature of human language that sets it apart from the communication systems of
other species (Hockett 1960); with the help of logical words like _and_, we
are able to produce an infinite number of sentences. Since these words set
human languages apart from animal communication systems, it is plausible that
they reflect specialised features of our language faculty, rather than
domain-general functional pressures. Despite this importance, however, the
cognitive basis underlying the universal properties of logical words has yet
to be thoroughly investigated, due to lack of a unified semantic theory for
relevant meanings and methodological difficulty in designing experiments to
test distinct hypotheses.

Recent theoretical and methodological developments in linguistics and
cognitive science finally enable us to fill this gap. Theoretically, advances
in semantic theories now make it possible to analyse the meanings of various
logical words in a unified framework, making it possible to state potential
generalisations holding in logical vocabularies in precise ways (Kratzer,
2012; Gärdenfors, 2014; Ciardelli et al., 2018; Chemla et al., 2018). This
includes the PI's own theoretical contribution (Uegaki, 2019), which has
enabled a unified formal analysis of the meanings of various clause-embedding
predicates. These theoretical advances come hand in hand with methodological
developments in cross-linguistic data collection. In addition, evolutionary
linguistics has shown that distinct aspects of linguistic communication can be
parcelled out and investigated systematically in the lab and computer
simulation, using experimental paradigms involving learning and transmission
of artificial languages (Kirby et al., 2015; Culbertson & Kirby, 2016). These
methods have only just begun to be used to explore semantics.

In this project, I will make use of these recent advances in semantics and
evolutionary linguistics to resolve the research question above: why the
observed semantic universals exist and what, if any, core properties of human
language or cognition they are rooted in. Not only will our research address
one of the most fundamental research questions in linguistics, but it will
also integrate semantics and evolutionary linguistics at an unprecedented
scale. 

### Research programme

The project involves the following four stages of research.

- S1. Through cross-linguistic data collection, we will empirically evaluate universals in logical vocabulary hypothesised in the literature. Moreover, we will seek to discover new universals. We consider both absolute universals and statistical tendencies.

- S2. We will construct semantic/pragmatic theories that explain the typology resulting from the data collection, based on two distinct hypotheses: Communicative Efficiency and Natural Logic.

- S3. We will test the theories constructed in 2 based on behavioural and computational modelling
experiments employing artificial-language learning.

- S4. We will extend the project in view of bilingualism research based on the results of Stage 3 to
investigate aspects of language use shown by non-native language learners.

At the end of the project, we will pursue a theoretical synthesis based on the overall theoretical and experimental findings, with the aim of reaching a conclusive answer to our research question, i.e., what core properties of human language or cognition are the semantic universals rooted in.
